[MUSIC]
>> Rachel Nabors: So let's talk a little
bit more about those state full
transitions.
Now Silicon Valley has been
carefully studying and
using motion design in operating
system UIs since the early 90s.
First, before we talk about why,
we need to understand
a concept called the jump cut.
You might have heard me
use this expression.
Now this is from film,
it describes when the camera cuts
directly to a different perspective.
For instance, a different angle or
a different screen.
No fade, no movement,
moving the camera is called a pan.
It's common in dramas, it's common for
showing conversations,
I've got something from
the public domain here.
Notice how we've got this establishing
shot of the two people and
now we've jumped cut to his face, right?
We're looking at his face, he looks to the
side and now when we jump cut to her face,
we're assuming cuz we had that little
early on directors figured that they
learned a couple of tricks.
One was that if you jump cut in
the direction that a person,
an actor on screen is looking, human
brains have now intuited that that is
where the camera is now
pointing a few seconds later.
There are a couple of other
rules like the 180 rule which is
that you never move the camera
outside 180 degrees of shooting.
Some people do break that for effect.
But you have to be a cinematic genius
to be able to break that
rule without consequence.
But for the rest of us,
breaking the 180 rule would cause
a lot of confusion in our audiences.
But specifically that having actors
looking towards the location of the next
shot and having these establishing shots
to show the relation of the actors in
relation to each other.
These were little things that
directors used to train audiences.
You think that back when talkies
first landed in cinemas that
people were following along easily?
No, they went through
a training period too.
And you can see this in very
early silent films, the motion,
there were a lot less cuts,
there were a lot more pans.
We've been stepping up how we use
these cuts as people have matured,
as our brains have become supple and
understood how it works.
So now we have this whole visual shorthand
that we're learning since the age we can
watch cartoons, and
we're not even aware we're using anymore.
So jump cuts, yes, let's take a look at
how jump cuts work in our user interface.
This is from codrops, now this is a drop
down and when you click on the button,
it's a little pale here, but
you can see that the whole drop down,
it just kind of appears, got some monkeys,
you got bears and squirrels.
It's jump cut, open, close,
open, close, state one,
state two, state one, state two.
So the human mind is pretty
darn clever when this happens.
We're clever enough to figure this
out when we're watching movies.
We're clever enough to figure it out
when it happens to our user interfaces.
So what you're brain is doing behind the
scene is it's taking a before-image and
an after-image.
And it's extrapolating between these two
shots to create something
a little bit like this.
That takes cognitive effort though,
it does.
This effort in traditional animation
is called in-betweening and
in-betweening in traditional animation
is only done by the most entry level or
inexpensive of animators.
People that you would perhaps,
ship this off overseas to do.
Steven Gordon, we saw him do the walk
cycle earlier, he's a key frame animator.
In an animation he would be
drawing the walking cat and
the sitting cat,
the before and after states.
And then they would send those frames
off to some people in Korea or
maybe in China,
a lot of animation happening in China now
where the dollar will get a lot more man
hours then it will in United States.
And nobody wants to be an in-betweener,
drawing all the cats in between.
It's a dead end job,
you cannot pay people in the United States
enough money to do this.
So all those little grey cats,
those are the in-betweens.
And when you have a jumpcut UI,
your brain is in-betweening all of that.
And we are all in our mental prime.
This, we look at this and
it's easy for us.
But we look at computers every day.
So our brains are optimized for this.
You could say that we run every UI
in our brain on our mental GPU.
They are all optimized for us.
But for really young and older users whose
brains are perhaps a little less nimble
and a little less adapted to working
in a strictly digital environment and
staring at a screen for
more than four hours a day.
Yes, we do stare at screens for
quite a bit of our waking life, do we not?
We do you have a few things we take for
granted and this is one of them.
So there's no in-betweening done.
It's all on their brains to do this.
It's all on their brains
to make this assumption.
That can get a little tiresome.
It can lead to a lot of
hearing of what just happened
when people are using an interface.
In fact, if you were standing in on some
user testing, who here does user testing
and they actually like show up and
watch people over the shoulders?
I see a couple of hands.
Good on you, good on you.
You might hear this what just
happened from time to time.
That's a good time to think,
could I have animated that to
make it a little more obvious?
If there's no direct,
immediate design decision you could have
made to have made it more obvious you
might consider how animation
might have made that work better.
So here's what happens when we've
actually animated the effect.
Now everyone is happy,
they can see clearly what's happening.
>> Rachel Nabors: Researchers learned
back in the 90s that animating
the transition between those two
states actually lets the user
take a shortcut through
their visual cortex.
So it handles the change in user interface
without disrupting their main task.
You can think of a human brain
a little bit like a computer.
You have a main thread and
then you have a GPU,
a graphics processing unit
in your visual cortex.
You can feed people a lot of information
through their visual cortex without
interrupting what they're
actually thinking about.
This is why you can drive and talk to
a person in your seat at the same time.
Here's a quote from a really great
paper that was released in 1993,
I love this one.
[COUGH]
Animation allows the user to continue
thinking about the task domain
with no need to shift context to
the interface domain.
By eliminating sudden visual changes,
animation lessens the chance
that the user is surprised.
So there were a bunch of papers published
about this in the early 90s and
then they all disappeared, probably as the
researchers were bought up and their work
became classified by you guessed it,
>> Rachel Nabors: Companies
that build operating systems and
later on, apps.
In fact, nowhere is motion in UI and
animation in UI for that matter more
apparent than in touch interfaces.
Can you imagine using your
smart phone with no animations?
Like it's just a tap and
a jump cut for everything you do.
Can you imagine that,
would you like using your phone?
Would you have bought your phone compared
to one that has an animated interface,
one that could anticipate gestures and
move things around under your
fingertips in response to your actions?
On such a small screen, you can't get away
with jump cuts like you can on a desktop.
Desktops have users trained, we spent
years learning how to disassociate
keyboard and mouse inputs from
what we see on the screen.
I remember doing that training
in elementary school.
Kids don't have to do it with touch
screens because they touch things on
a screen and the things react to them.
That's very important.
So Apple invested so
much in animation and touch and
coupling them tightly together.
Apple was not the first company
to come up with a touchscreen.
But it was the first company to couple
these two things so closely and so well
together that people definitely preferred
this interface to the competition's.
>> Rachel Nabors: Animation was
a big part of the iPhone's success.
So the visual cortex, this is a much
better visual representation.
It works like your computer's GPU,
it's dedicated to processing graphical
information while the rest of the machine
can get on with doing what it needs to do.
It's a little shortcut you can take.
I use this image because this
image is like a shortcut too.
And this is one of the reasons
why jank is so dangerous.
And a little rough performance like
if that gesture on your phone,
the screen is dragging behind where you're
trying to pull it with your finger and
it's just not quite making it.
It destroys that illusion of life,
that illusion of one to one
interconnection between your
interaction and the screen's response.
And this is why performance with animation
is such a big deal because if you don't
get those very smooth and
sinuous animations down, it bounces
people right back onto their main thread.
So you might wanna use animation to get
people going through their visual cortex.
But if you're animation is janky,
if it stutters, if it shudders, if there
are breaks between point A and Point B, it
pops them right back onto the main thread.
And you're losing all that perceived speed
boost and all of that cognitive load ease,
you're dumping it right out and
you're burning battery power
while you're doing it.